## Introduction {.page_break_before}

For a high quality and a long life, genome integrity must be preserved. 
This rule that applies for all the living, 
will not only protect individual’s health, 
also increase the chance of survival 
and having a better life quality of offspring who will inherit the genome left from that individual. Our genome is constantly under the threat of damage occurrence 
which might turn into mutations if it isn’t repaired before the next division of the cell. 
There are variant forms of these damages such as apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) sites, DNA adducts, single-stranded breaks, double-stranded breaks, intrastrand and interstrand cross-links, insertion/deletion mismatches, oxidative base damages, alkylated bases, etc. [@tag:neurodegen]. 
UV-radiation, cancer drugs such as cisplatin, oxaliplatin, replication errors or many other factors can induce these damages occur. 
It is a common thing to observe DNA damages on cells, 
in fact, in a human cell approximately 70,000 damages happen in daily bases [@tag:dnaDamage]. 
If they are not repaired, they can lead to blockage or impairment of transcription or replication. 
In the long run, cells become more susceptible to carcinogenesis, aging and aging related chronic diseases. 

Fortunately, we have repair mechanisms that can coup with damage occurrence rate 
and prevent most of these damages to turn into mutations. 
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is one of those repair mechanisms which is effective against bulky DNA lesions induced by UV-radiation ((6-4)PPs, CPDs) or chemotherapy drugs cisplatin, oxaliplatin (Pt-d(GpG)). 
NER mechanism can be divided into four basic steps that are damage recognition, lesion verification and excision, gap-filling DNA synthesis and ligation. 
There are two NER mechanisms that only differ from each other on how they recognize damage, 
but this difference has a huge impact on their working areas. 
While global genomic nucleotide excision repair (GG-NER) works on the whole genome, 
transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER) specifically targets transcription blocking regions [@tag:nerAging]. 

Two methods introduced in recent years, Damage-seq and XR-seq [@tag:DSXRseq], 
can map the bulky DNA lesion damages and repair of them respectively. 
These methods and their results have great potential to reveal the unknowns of the NER mechanism. 
One of the things we were eager to uncover is; 
whether NER mechanism’s working rate changes in different replication domains. 
Replication domain model suggests that, 
replication consist of four different domains. 
Early replicating domains (ERDs) contain the locations where replication forks initiate 
and contains genes that are mostly needed at the early time periods of S phase. 
Late replicating domains (LRDs) contain the genes 
that are replicated at the late time periods of S phase. 
These domains are connected to each other with up transition zones (UTZs) and down transition zones (DTZs) [@tag:repDomain]. 
Analyzing the replication domains with our Damage-seq and XR-seq data 
can provide important information about the cells’ priorities on repairing bulky DNA lesions during replication. 
Another question that we ardently look for an answer is: 
“Is NER mechanism mediated by the strand asymmetry?”. 
Earlier studies suggest that during replication, 
lagging strand is more susceptible to mutations occurred by bulky DNA lesions, 
because of their error-prone mechanism [@tag:errorProneBypass].  

In this article, we investigated the effect of replication timing on the NER mechanism. 
DNA replication occurs in the S phase of the cell cycle, in between 8-10 hours [@tag:cellPhase]. 
To make a comparison of repair between time periods of replication, 
we radiated HeLa cells with UV in three different time periods which are early, late and asynchronized phases. 
In the early phase experiment, we synchronized all the cells to early replication timing 
and for the late phase experiment, cells synchronized to late replication timing. 
Finally, asynchronized phase contains both phases together without any synchronization. 
12 minutes after the UV exposure, 
we performed damage-seq and XR-seq methods for both (6-4)PP and CPD damages twice. 
HeLa cells chosen for their ability of unstoppable proliferation 
which means these samples are constantly replicating. 
And because the fact that they are highly studied cell lines, 
there are many available public data on HeLa cells.