## Methods {.page_break_before}

### Cell lines (HeLa S3)

### Oligonucleotides and adaptors

### Damage-seq library preparation

### XR-seq library preparation

### Damage-seq sequence analysis

The sequenced reads that contains adapter sequence 
5’-GACTGGTTCCAATTGAAAGTGCTCTTCCGATCT-3' discarded via cutadapt [@tag:cutadapt], 
because those sequences do not have any damage. 
The remaining reads aligned to the hg19 human female genome using bowtie2 [@tag:bowtie2]. 
Length distributions of the reads and dinucleotide composition, damage positions 
which are preceding two nucleotides of the reads determined using samtools and bedtools [@tag:bedtools]. 
Then they visualized using R programming language with “ggplot2” package. 
The reads that do not contain dipyrimidines (TT, TC, CT, CC),
filtered to discard unnecessary reads.  

### XR-seq sequence analysis

The adaptor sequence of sequenced reads which is 
5’- TGGAATTCTCGGGTGCCAAGGAACTCCAGTNNNNNNACGATCTCGTATGCCGTCTTCTGCTTG-3' 
trimmed using cutadapt [@tag:cutadapt]. 
Similar to damage-seq sequence analysis, 
the reads aligned to the hg19 human female genome using bowtie2 [@tag:bowtie2]. 
Length distributions of the reads and dinucleotide composition determined 
via samtools and bedtools [@tag:bedtools] 
and they are visualized using “ggplot2” package of R programming language.

### Datasets

Replication domains obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), accession no: GSE53984. 
High replication fork direction and initiation zones datasets 
which kindly given us can be obtained from accession no: SRP065949 as raw Ok-seq data. 
Lastly SNS-seq data can be obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), accession no: GSE37757. 
All these datasets are intersected with our samples via bedtools [@tag:bedtools]. 

### Further Analysis

To properly compare our sample data between each other, 
we used RPKM normalization. 
Then RPKM values of repair (XR-seq) data divided by damage data 
at every position for further normalization. 
Early to late phases and minus to plus strand ratios are taken 
to investigate the effect of replication timing and strand asymmetry respectively. 
All plots produced using R programming language.  

### Peak Calling

To find the locations where exposed to UV damage while replicating, 
we used a Repli-seq data that can be accessed from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), accession no: GSM923449. 
In this data, S phase divided into four based on the replication timing 
and our target locations were between the subphases S1 and S2. 
We used a peak caller MACS2 [@tag:macs] with default parameters 
to get the locations we need from BigWig files. 