## Abstract 


Helix-distorting DNA lesions are removed by nucleotide excision repair (NER), which consists of two subpathways: (i) global and (ii) transcription-coupled repair (TCR). TCR is active in the transcribed DNA strand when RNA polymerase is stalled at the damaged site, whereas global repair acts anywhere in the genome. With the recent genome-wide mapping techniques, DNA damage and repair events were assessed in comparison with chromatin structure. However, there has been no in-depth study that scrutinizes the differences between exonic and intronic excision repair. Here, we analyzed DNA damage and repair in these two types of genic regions and revealed differential patterns. We found that both global and transcription-coupled repair is more prominent in exons. Plus, we observed that global repair is repressed in the transcribed strand of intronic regions. These observations suggested that chromatin markers that are distinctly specific to exons and introns might cause such a repair bias. We analyzed those epigenetic factors and revealed their effect on DNA repair. This study reveals that DNA is heterogeneously repaired within the same gene independently of damage distribution, which we showed to be uniform. These results could explain the reduced exonic mutation rate in skin and lung cancer, where NER is the primary mechanism to remove such mutagenic DNA lesions.

The observation of the exon bias in both transcribed and non-transcribed strand as well as CSB mutant cells where there is only global repair suggest that this bias is mainly esatblished through global repair rather than transcription-coupled repair.

