## Introduction {.page_break_before}

It has been well-established that exons are more conserved than introns. This fact has been attributed to negative selection pressure acting on protein-coding regions, which are most exons compared to introns, which are not coding and under significantly less negative pressure. It has also been shown in a variety of tumors that exonic mutation occurrence is significantly lower than mutations in introns. Since there is no evolutionary time for them to be selected for in tumors, another mechanism should be in place to yield such a difference in mutation burden. Mismatch repair has been shown to act preferentially on exons compared to introns [@doi:10.1038/ng.3991]. This observation was partly explained by the epigenetic factors differentially marking exons and introns [@doi:10.1038/ng.3991; @doi:10.1038/nsmb.1659]. 

A fewer number of exonic mutations in melanomas, lung carcinomas are observed. These mutations are mostly caused by the damaging agents resulting in DNA-bulky adducts. These lesions are repaired by nucleotide excision repair. Whether nucleotide excision repair (excision repair) mechanism biasedly prefer exonic regions to repair is not fully understood yet. It is implicated that excision repair like mismatch repair could also prefer exons to repair better. This observation is yet to be clarified in the function of two subpathways of excision repair: (i) global (basal) repair and (ii) transcription-coupled repair [@doi:10.1074/jbc.R117.807453].

In this work, we used Damage-seq [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1706522114] and XR-seq [@doi:10.1101/gad.261271.115] datasets to get more insight into nucleotide excision repair preference in the genic regions. Briefly, XR-seq method captures the excised oligomers with lengths ranging from 20 to 32 bases. The method relies on the immunoprecipitation with TFIIH or anti-damage antibodies. Damage-seq, on the other hand, directly captures the damaged nucleotides by benefiting from the high fidelity DNA polymerase, which stops when it encounters damage. Damage-seq and XR-seq methods yield genomic maps of single nucleotide resolution for damage and repair events, respectively.