## Results

Repair normalized by Damage. (NHF1 1h Damage-seq)
Separate into quartiles
XR-seq TCR
RNA-seq (independent)
Dipyrimidine content
Explanation of TCR-only repair on NTS of XPC cells
Line plot of exons vs introns
Explanation of the chromatin markers between exon vs intron plot of them.
Repair of other damage types such as cisplatin, oxaliplatin, BPDE.
HeLa cell repair inhibition in TS.
DRB treated CSB and HeLa cells.


Is RNAPII involved in global repair? Does TCR happen without CSB?



Observations:

“In yeast, Pol II occupancy was higher in introns than in exons, and this difference was inversely correlated with gene expression levels at a global level. “  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3245620/ 




Preferred genome-wide repair in exons

We retrieved annotated exons and introns of the protein-coding genes. We processed the XR-seq data files from NHF1, CSB mutant and XPC mutant cell lines based on the standard pipeline that was developed before. The counts of excised oligomers for exons and introns were merged separately for each gene. The total reads for each gene were normalized based on the total region length as well as the total mapped reads. Since XR-seq yields strand information we distinguished between reads mapping onto the transcribed strand (TS) and nontranscribed strand (NTS) of each gene.

NHF1 cells were exposed to ultraviolet (UV) and excised oligomers were collected 1 hour after the damage. Majority of the NHF1 genes had higher levels of repair for both CPD and (6-4)PP damages. The difference between exonic repair was higher in CPD relative to (6-4)PP possibly due to the quicker repair of (6-4)PPs on both strands. 

More prominent transcription-coupled repair in exons

CPDs on transcribed strand (TS) are repaired more efficiently than non-transcribed strand (NTS) die to high efficiency of TCR. On the other hand, (6-4)PPs are repaired faster and they are less prone to transcription-coupled repair. Therefore, CPDs relative to (6-4)PPs are repaired 

Exonic repair bias is more apparent in poorly repaired genes




### Uniform damage distribution between exons and introns

The repair bias could be caused by heterogeneous damage distribution. In order to rule out that possibility, we benefitted from Damage-seq method which yields genome-wide damage maps at single nucleotide resolution. We analyzed wild-type NHF1 cells for CPDs and (6-4)PPs. We observed no difference between damage formation likelihood between introns and exons. 



### Stalled RNAPII differentially impairs intronic global repair

When stalled at a DNA lesion RNAPII efficiently recruits repair machinery to the damaged site and allows transcription-coupled repair. TCR is especially prevalent in CPD repair compared to (6-4)PP in wildtype cells. We naturally observe more repair event in TS relative to NTS. In the absence of the transcription-coupled repair factor, CSB, the global repair is the only excision repair to remove UV damages. In that case, we expect to observe equivalent DNA repair between TS and NTS. Interestingly, intron regions show significantly lower TS repair compared to NTS in CSB cells. This could be explained by a previously established model where stalled RNAPII inhibits global repair. This repair bias is not observed in exonic regions. These observations suggest that a combination of stalled RNAPII and intron-specific chromatin markers inhibit global DNA repair on the transcribed strand. The mechanism of how stalled RNAPII can affect global repair differentially in exons can be modeled with the light of information regarding the differential RNAPII occupancy between exons and introns. In yeast, it was shown that RNAPII occupancy was higher in introns. This suggests that it is expected to observe more stalled RNAPII in introns. Therefore, the global repair machinery would less likely remove damage in the intronic regions due to the occupation of the damaged site by RNAPII. 



![UV-induced damages are preferentially repaired in exons in HeLa-cells. The data is the average of the two replicates for both (6-4)PP and CPD. Transcribed (TS) and non-transcribed (NTS) strands are plotted separetely.
](images/HeLa.svg){#fig:hela .white}

![UV-induced damages are preferentially repaired in exons in NHF1 cells. The data is the average of the two replicates for both (6-4)PP and CPD. Transcribed (TS) and non-transcribed (NTS) strands are plotted separetely.
](images/NHF1.png){#fig:nhf1 .white}

![UV-induced damages are preferentially repaired in exons in NHF1 cells. The data is the average of the two replicates for both (6-4)PP and CPD. Transcribed (TS) and non-transcribed (NTS) strands are plotted separetely.
](images/mutants.png){#fig:mutant .white}

![TCR effect on exon repair bias. Exonic repair preference is negatviely correlated with transcription-coupled repair rate for CPD. 
](images/NHF1_TCR.png){#fig:TCR .white}

![....
](images/mutant_TCR.png){#fig:mutTCR .white}



It has been reported that RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) occupies exons more than introns [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty886; @doi:10.1038/nsmb.2143]. 
Nascent RNA sequencing studies resulted in sawtooth pattern meaning the most od the data arise from exons and diluted in the introns until the following exon. 
With this observation in hand one can speculate that exons are more prone to RNAPII-based opening of the chromatin which may be the reason for global repair to be more efficient in the exons. 
In order to test that we analyzed the exon bias in the function of transcription. 
Interestingly we observed a negative corelation between exon repar rate bias and expression, suggesting the genes that are higly expressed have less exon repair bias. 

RNAPII was shown to pause over exons in intron-containing genes with three main modes: (i) terminal exon pausing; (ii) 3' splite site pausing and (iii) exon pausing due to alternative splicing [@doi:10.1016/j.tcb.2011.03.002]. 
We thought that could be the reason of the exonic repair bias. We checked whether the observed exonic repair preference is mediated by RNAPII pausing. 


With BruDRB-seq it was foun that H3K79me2, H3K20me2, H3K4me1 increase the elongation rate [@doi:10.1101/gr.171405.113]. 
Moreover low-complexity genes as well as long genes had faster elongation rate. 
In contrast, exons slowed down elongation rate [@doi:10.1101/gr.171405.113]. 


CpG methylation was found to slow down RNAP elongation rate [@doi:10.1101/gr.171405.113].







