## Methods {.page_break_before}

### Cell culture and treatments

HeLa S3 cells (purchased from ATCC) were cultured in DMEM medium supplemented with 10%
FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C in a 5% atmosphere CO 2 humidified chamber.
Cells were synchronized at late G1 phase by double-thymidine treatment, then released into S
phase by removing thymidine. In brief, for first thymidine treatment, thymidine was added to
cells at 50% confluence to a final concentration of 2mM. After 18 hours, cells were released by
washing with PBS and cultured in fresh medium for 9 hours. Then cells were treated with 2mM
thymidine for 15 hours and released into S phase for indicated time before UV irradiation. Cells
were irradiated with 20J/m 2 of UVC as described, then collected immediately or after incubation
at 37 °C for indicated time for the following assays.

### Flow cytometry analysis

Cells were trypsinized, PBS washed and fixed in 70 % (v/v) ethanol at −20°C for at least 2 hours,
then stained in the staining solution (0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 0.2 mg/ml RNase A and 20 g/ml
propidium iodide in PBS) for 30 min at room temperature. Then S phase progression of the cells
was analyzed by a flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter CyAn or Becton Dickinson FACSCanto II).

### Damage-seq and XR-seq libraries preparation and sequencing

Cells were collected in ice-cold PBS at indicated time and subjected to Damage-seq (HS-
Damage-seq) and XR-seq as previously described.
For Damage-seq, briefly, genomic DNA were extracted with PureLink Genomic DNA Mini Kit
(Thermo) and sheared by sonication with a Q800 Sonicator (Qsonica). DNA fragments (1μg)
were used for end repair, dA-tailing and ligation with Ad1 by NEBNext UltraII DNA Library
Prep kit (New England Biolabs). Samples were then denatured and subjected to
immunoprecipitation with anti-(6-4)PP or anti-CPD antibody (Cosmo Bio), respectively. In order
to detect the precise position of lesions, primer Bio3U was attached to purified DNA and
extended by NEBNext UltraII Q5 DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs). After purification,
the extension products were annealed to oligo SH for subtractive hybridization. Oilgo SH was
then removed by incubating with Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (Thermo) and the rest of
the sample was ligated to Ad2, followed by PCR amplification.
For XR-seq, in brief, fresh cells were lysed by Douce Homogenizer in Buffer A (ref). After
centrifuging to remove chromatin DNA, co-immunoprecipitation with anti-XPG (Santa Cruz)
antibody was performed to pull down primary excision products generated by nucleotide excision
repair. Purified excised fragments were ligated to both 5’ and 3’ adaptors. Ligation products were
further purified by immunoprecipitation with either anti-(6-4)PP or anti-CPD antibody and
repaired by corresponding photolyase, followed by PCR amplification and gel purification.
Libraries with different indexes were pooled and sequenced in SE50 form on Hiseq 2000/2500
platform by the University of North Carolina High-Throughput Sequencing Facility, or in PE150
form on Hiseq X platform by the WuXiNextCODE Company.

### Damage-seq sequence pre-analysis

The sequenced reads with adapter sequence GACTGGTTCCAATTGAAAGTGCTCTTCCGATCT 
at 5' end, 
were discarded via cutadapt with default parameters 
for both single-end and paired-end reads [@tag:cutadapt]. 
The remaining reads were aligned to the hg19 human genome using bowtie2 with 4 threads (`-p`) [@tag:bowtie2].
For paired-end reads, maximum fragment length (`-X`), which means the maximum accepted total length of mated reads and the gap between them, was chosen as 1000. 
Using samtools, aligned paired-end reads were converted to bam format, 
sorted using `samtools sort -n` command, 
and properly mapped reads with a mapping quality greater than 20 were filtered 
using the command `samtools view -q 20 -bf 0x2` in the respective order [referans]. 
Then, resulting bam files were converted into bed format using 
`bedtools bamtobed -bedpe -mate1` command [@tag:bedtools].
The aligned single-end reads were directly converted into bam format 
after the removal of low quality reads (mapping quality smaller than 20) 
and further converted into bed format with `bedtools bamtobed` command [@tag:bedtools].
Because the exact damage sites should to be positioned at two nucleotides upstream of the reads [referans], bedtools flank and slop command were used to obtain 10 nucleotide long positions 
bearing damage sites at the center (5. and 6. positions) [@tag:bedtools].
The reads that have the same starting and ending positions, were reduced to a single read 
for deduplication and remaining reads were sorted with the command 
`sort -u -k1,1 -k2,2n -k3,3n`. 
Then, reads that did not contain dipyrimidines (TT, TC, CT, CC) at their damage site (5. and 6. positions) were filtered out to eliminate all the reads that do not harbor a UV damage.
Lastly, only the reads that were aligned to common chromosomes (chromosome 1-22 + X)
were held for further analysis.

### XR-seq sequence pre-analysis

The adaptor sequence TGGAATTCTCGGGTGCCAAGGAACTCCAGTNNNNNNACGATCTCGTATGCCGTCTTCTGCTTG at the 3' of the reads were trimmed and sequences without the adaptor sequences were discarded using cutadapt with default parameters [@tag:cutadapt].
Bowtie2 was used with 4 threads (`-p`) to align the reads to the hg19 human genome [@tag:bowtie2]. 
Then reads with mapping quality smaller than 20 were removed by samtools [referans]. 
Bam files obtained from samtools were converted into bed format by bedtools [@tag:bedtools].
Multiple reads that were aligned to the same position, were reduced to a single read to 
prevent duplication affect and remaining reads were sorted with the command 
`sort -u -k1,1 -k2,2n -k3,3n`.  
Lastly, only the reads that were aligned to common chromosomes 
were held for further analysis.

### Dna-seq sequence pre-analysis

Paired-end reads were aligned to hg19 human genome via bowtie2 with 4 threads (`-p`) 
and maximum fragment length (`-X`) chosen as 1000 [@tag:bowtie2]. 
Sam files were converted into bed format 
as it was performed at damage-seq paired-end reads.
Duplicates were removed 
and reads were sorted with `sort -u -k1,1 -k2,2n -k3,3n` command.
Lastly, the reads that did not align to the common chromosomes were discarded.


### XR-seq and Damage-seq simulation

Art simulator was used to produce synthetic reads with the parameters
`-l 26 -f 2`, `-l 10 -f 2` for XR-seq and Damage-seq, respectively [44].
To better represent our filtered real reads,
read length (`-l`) parameter was chosen as the most frequent read length after pre-analysis done.
The `.fastq` file that Art produced, were filtered according to our reads by 
calculating a score using nucleotide frequency of the real reads and
obtaining most similar 10 million simulated reads. 
The filtering was done by `filter_syn_fasta.go` script, 
which is available at the repository: https://github.com/compGenomeLab/lemurRepair.
Filtered files were preceded by pre-analysis again for further analysis.


### Data sets

Replication domains obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), accession no: GSE53984. 
High replication fork direction and initiation zones datasets 
which kindly given us can be obtained from accession no: SRP065949 as raw OK-seq data. 
Lastly SNS-seq data can be obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), accession no: GSE37757. 

Melanoma somatic mutations of 183 tumor samples were obtained 
from the data portal of International Cancer Genome
Consortium (ICGC) as compressed `.tsv` files which is publicly available at 
https://dcc.icgc.org/releases/release_28/Projects/MELA-AU.
Single base substitution mutations were extracted, 
and only the mutations of common chromosomes were used.
To obtain the mutations that could be caused by UV-induced photoproducts, 
C -> T mutations that have a pyrimidine at the upstream nucleotide 
was further extracted.  
Later on, mutations were quantified on 20 kb long initiation zones 
that were separated into their corresponding replication domains 
using `bedtools intersect` command with the `-wa -c -F 0.5` options.


### Further Analysis

In order to separate a region data (replication domains, initiation zones, or replication origins)
into chosen number of (201) bins,
the start and end positions of all the regions set to a desired range with the unix command:
`awk -v a="$intervalLen" -v b="$windowNum" -v c="$name" '{print $1"\t"int(($2+$3)/2-a/2-a*(b-1)/2)"\t"int(($2+$3)/2+a/2+a*(b-1)/2)"\t"$4"\t"".""\t"$6}'`
Then, any intersecting regions or regions crossing the borders of its chromosomes were filtered  
to eliminate the possibility of signal's canceling out effect.
After that, `bedtools makewindows` command was used with the `-n 201 -i srcwinnum` options 
to create a `.bed` file contaiing the bins.

To quantify the XR-seq and Damage-seq profiles on the prepared `.bed` file,
`bedtools intersect` command was used to intersect  
as it was performed for mutation data.
Then all bins were aggregated given their bin numbers,
and the mean of the total value of each bin were calculated.
Lastly RPKM normalization was performed and the plots were produced  
using ggplot2 in R programming language.
